# Enjoy the free API after creating your Models
With that, you’ve got a free, and rich, Python API to access your data. The API is created on the fly, no code generation necessary:

# Playing with the API
Now, let’s hop into the interactive Python shell and play around with the free API Django gives you. To invoke the
Python shell, use this command:
# python manage.py shell

# Import the models we created from our "news" app
>>> from news.models import Article, Reporter
# No reporters are in the system yet.
>>> Reporter.objects.all()
<QuerySet []>

# Create a new Reporter.

>>> r = Reporter(full_name='John Smith')
# Save the object into the database. You have to call save() explicitly.
>>> r.save()
# Now it has an ID.
>>> r.id
1
# Now the new reporter is in the database.
>>> Reporter.objects.all()
<QuerySet [<Reporter: John Smith>]>

# Fields are represented as attributes on the Python object.
>>> r.full_name
'John Smith'
# Django provides a rich database lookup API.
>>> Reporter.objects.get(id=1)
<Reporter: John Smith>
>>> Reporter.objects.get(full_name__startswith='John')
<Reporter: John Smith>
>>> Reporter.objects.get(full_name__contains='mith')
<Reporter: John Smith>

>>> Reporter.objects.get(id=2)
Traceback (most recent call last):
...
DoesNotExist: Reporter matching query does not exist.
# Create an article.
>>> from datetime import date
>>> a = Article(pub_date=date.today(), headline='Django is cool',
... content='Yeah.', reporter=r)
>>> a.save()
# Now the article is in the database.
>>> Article.objects.all()
<QuerySet [<Article: Django is cool>]>

# Article objects get API access to related Reporter objects.
>>> r = a.reporter
>>> r.full_name
'John Smith'
# And vice versa: Reporter objects get API access to Article objects.

>>> r.article_set.all()
<QuerySet [<Article: Django is cool>]>

# The API follows relationships as far as you need, performing efficient
# JOINs for you behind the scenes.
# This finds all articles by a reporter whose name starts with "John".

>>> Article.objects.filter(reporter__full_name__startswith='John')
<QuerySet [<Article: Django is cool>]>

# Change an object by altering its attributes and calling save().
>>> r.full_name = 'Billy Goat'
>>> r.save()
# Delete an object with delete().
>>> r.delete()






>>> from polls.models import Choice, Question 

# No questions are in the system yet.
>>> Question.objects.all()
<QuerySet []>

# Create a new Question.
# Support for time zones is enabled in the default settings file, so
# Django expects a datetime with tzinfo for pub_date. Use timezone.now()
# instead of datetime.datetime.now() and it will do the right thing.

>>> from django.utils import timezone
>>> q = Question(question_text="What's new?", pub_date=timezone.now())
# Save the object into the database. You have to call save() explicitly.
>>> q.save()
# Now it has an ID.
>>> q.id
1
# Access model field values via Python attributes.
>>> q.question_text
"What's new?"
>>> q.pub_date
datetime.datetime(2012, 2, 26, 13, 0, 0, 775217, tzinfo=<UTC>)
# Change values by changing the attributes, then calling save().
>>> q.question_text = "What's up?"
>>> q.save()
# objects.all() displays all the questions in the database.
>>> Question.objects.all()
<QuerySet [<Question: Question object (1)>]>







>>> from polls.models import Choice, Question
# Make sure our __str__() addition worked.
>>> Question.objects.all()
<QuerySet [<Question: What's up?>]>

# Django provides a rich database lookup API that's entirely driven by
# keyword arguments.
>>> Question.objects.filter(id=1)
<QuerySet [<Question: What's up?>]>

>>> Question.objects.filter(question_text__startswith='What')
<QuerySet [<Question: What's up?>]>

# Get the question that was published this year.
>>> from django.utils import timezone
>>> current_year = timezone.now().year
>>> Question.objects.get(pub_date__year=current_year)
<Question: What's up?>

# Request an ID that doesn't exist, this will raise an exception.
>>> Question.objects.get(id=2)
Traceback (most recent call last):
...
DoesNotExist: Question matching query does not exist.
# Lookup by a primary key is the most common case, so Django provides a
# shortcut for primary-key exact lookups.
# The following is identical to Question.objects.get(id=1).
>>> Question.objects.get(pk=1)
<Question: What's up?>

# Make sure our custom method worked.
>>> q = Question.objects.get(pk=1)
>>> q.was_published_recently()
True
# Give the Question a couple of Choices. The create call constructs a new
# Choice object, does the INSERT statement, adds the choice to the set
# of available choices and returns the new Choice object. Django creates
# a set to hold the "other side" of a ForeignKey relation
# (e.g. a question's choice) which can be accessed via the API.
>>> q = Question.objects.get(pk=1)
# Display any choices from the related object set -- none so far.
>>> q.choice_set.all()
<QuerySet []>

# Create three choices.
>>> q.choice_set.create(choice_text='Not much', votes=0)
<Choice: Not much>

>>> q.choice_set.create(choice_text='The sky', votes=0)
<Choice: The sky>

>>> c = q.choice_set.create(choice_text='Just hacking again', votes=0)
# Choice objects have API access to their related Question objects.
>>> c.question
<Question: What's up?>

# And vice versa: Question objects get access to Choice objects.
>>> q.choice_set.all()
<QuerySet [<Choice: Not much>, <Choice: The sky>, <Choice: Just hacking again>]>

>>> q.choice_set.count()
3
# The API automatically follows relationships as far as you need.
# Use double underscores to separate relationships.
# This works as many levels deep as you want; there's no limit.
# Find all Choices for any question whose pub_date is in this year
# (reusing the 'current_year' variable we created above).
>>> Choice.objects.filter(question__pub_date__year=current_year)
<QuerySet [<Choice: Not much>, <Choice: The sky>, <Choice: Just hacking again>]>

# Let's delete one of the choices. Use delete() for that.
>>> c = q.choice_set.filter(choice_text__startswith='Just hacking')
>>> c.delete()






# We identify a bug
Fortunately, there’s a little bug in the polls application for us to fix right away: the Question.
was_published_recently() method returns True if the Question was published within the last day (which
is correct) but also if the Question’s pub_date field is in the future (which certainly isn’t).
Confirm the bug by using the shell to check the method on a question whose date lies in the future:

# python manage.py shell

>>> import datetime
>>> from django.utils import timezone
>>> from polls.models import Question
>>> # create a Question instance with pub_date 30 days in the future
>>> future_question = Question(pub_date=timezone.now() + datetime.timedelta(days=30))
>>> # was it published recently?
>>> future_question.was_published_recently()
True
Since things in the future are not ‘recent’, this is clearly wrong.








# Test a view
The polls application is fairly undiscriminating: it will publish any question, including ones whose pub_date field
lies in the future. We should improve this. Setting a pub_date in the future should mean that the Question is
published at that moment, but invisible until then.
# A test for a view
When we fixed the bug above, we wrote the test first and then the code to fix it. In fact that was an example of
test-driven development, but it doesn’t really matter in which order we do the work.
In our first test, we focused closely on the internal behavior of the code. For this test, we want to check its behavior as
it would be experienced by a user through a web browser.
Before we try to fix anything, let’s have a look at the tools at our disposal.
# The Django test client
Django provides a test Client to simulate a user interacting with the code at the view level. We can use it in
tests.py or even in the shell.
We will start again with the shell, where we need to do a couple of things that won’t be necessary in tests.py.
The first is to set up the test environment in the shell:

# python manage.py shell
>>> from django.test.utils import setup_test_environment
>>> setup_test_environment()

'''
setup_test_environment() installs a template renderer which will allow us to examine some additional attributes on responses such as response.context that otherwise wouldn’t be available. Note that this method
does not setup a test database, so the following will be run against the existing database and the output may differ
slightly depending on what questions you already created. You might get unexpected results if your TIME_ZONE in
settings.py isn’t correct. If you don’t remember setting it earlier, check it before continuing.
Next we need to import the test client class (later in tests.py we will use the django.test.TestCase class,
which comes with its own client, so this won’t be required):
'''
>>> from django.test import Client
>>> # create an instance of the client for our use
>>> client = Client()

>>> # get a response from '/'
>>> response = client.get('/')
Not Found: /
>>> # we should expect a 404 from that address; if you instead see an
>>> # "Invalid HTTP_HOST header" error and a 400 response, you probably
>>> # omitted the setup_test_environment() call described earlier.
>>> response.status_code
404
>>> # on the other hand we should expect to find something at '/polls/'
>>> # we'll use 'reverse()' rather than a hardcoded URL
>>> from django.urls import reverse
>>> response = client.get(reverse('polls:index'))
>>> response.status_code
200
>>> response.content
b'\n <ul>\n \n <li><a href="/polls/1/">What&#x27;s up?</a></li>\n \n
˓→ </ul>\n\n'
>>> response.context['latest_question_list']
<QuerySet [<Question: What's up?>]>
